---
layout: post
title: Automating Popularity 
subtitle: An experiment to see if controlling your Facebook by algorithm can make you more popular
published: true
author: Jack Kinsella

---

Two years ago I wrote a program that logged into my Facebook account and pretended to be me. I wanted to test the hypothesis that:

 “automatic tools could make someone more popular”

If I could build a script caused more of my friends to get in touch with me, then my hypothesis would be show to be true. If instead the script had no effect on my popularity, or was detected as a fraud by the people in my network, then the hypothesis would be false. 

Before I carried out the experiment I studied some social psychology. According to the texts, a new acquaintance turns into a friendship when they appear frequently in our lives; when they share our interests, beliefs, and backgrounds; and when we know that they return our affinity for them by liking us back.

Newly informed, I modelled these concepts by creating a script that logged into my Facebook account and automatically liked the status updates, photos and comments of my friends, deleting the evidence as it went.

Five days later the results were in. See the video record at "Ignite the West":http://www.ignitethewest.com/ for the full story:

<iframe width="420" height="315" src="http://www.youtube.com/embed/PbVlUVMRGTI" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Thanks to "Ellen Dudley":https://twitter.com/#!/meetforeal and "Adrian Avendano":https://twitter.com/#!/amonter5, two awesome people changing the world for the better, for organising Ignite the West.

h2. Need a creative freelance developer? 

I'm interested in this space, and I'd like to carry out larger scale experiments. More advanced algorithms likely be used to simulate more social interactions, and be put to profitable use in simulating online engagement, gaming, marketing and even politics. I've been working privately on more advanced variations, and if you have a project in this area, I'm available for "contract work":/rails-developer-london.html.
